---
layout: page
title: Mörk Borg
date: 2021-10-31
tags: [books]
share: false
---
In September 2021 read an interesting thread on rpg.net, [The Last Five Years:
What are the best new games since
2016](https://forum.rpg.net/index.php?threads/the-last-five-years-what-are-the-best-new-games-since-2016.884619/).
It mentions many games I'm familiar with and consider good (e.g., *Blades in
the Dark*). *Mörk Borg* is mentioned a few times. I would say it's the most
enthusiastically discussed game on that thread that I'm not familiar with. So,
in late 2021, I took the plunge and bought the book.

*Mörk Borg* really is a rather remarkable piece of graphic design,
(self-consciously?) over the top but still effective. It brought back the
experience of reading the *Warhammer 40k* rulebook as a teenager. (Just like
the recent port of *Spiro the Dragon* that "looks like you remember it",
because of rose-tinted glasses this is no mean feat and requires significantly
more than mere fidelity to the original.) But the game design appeals, too: I
think it strikes the right balance, being very minimalist but not _too_ sparse.
I'm reminded a bit of *World of Dungeons*; both games feature a list of random
names, something non-obvious but in practice very helpful when playing. In
general, there's a good number of evocative random tables, and the classes have
strong narrative content, too.

While I think it's a great game for someone, I'm not sure if it's the right one
for me. For one thing, "A doom metal album of a game. A spiked flail to the
face" is not the mood I usually seek in my RPG experiences. I would say *Mouse
Guard* best captures the feeling I most enjoy: gritty, but hopeful and even
heroic. Mörk Borg may just be too dark a place for my mind to enjoy visiting.

The other way the game doesn't quite click for me is the mechanical layer: it's
OSR. I'd characterize my history as an RPG hobbyist as a gradual journey away
from the trad games of my youth (*Earthdawn*, *Vampire: the Masquerade*) via
"semi-trad" games like *Burning Wheel* and *Mouse Guard*, to more "narrative"
ones like *Lady Blackbird*, *Blades in the Dark*, [The Night
Witches](/notes/books/night_witches), *Agon*, or *Microscope*. OSR and
"narrative" games take very different approach to resolving the difficulties of
traditional games. The "narrative" game take is, broadly speaking, to add
mechanics that better align players' incentives with what makes for a good
story (*Lady Blackbird*'s Keys are an excellent example of this), while
removing mechanics elsewhere to prevent the game from becoming unwieldy. The
OSR games instead pare down the rules to the "good old" core of earliest D&D.
I'm suspicious of that strategy: it seems motivated by sentimentalism for
designers' youth rather than a convincing analysis of traditional games'
shortcomings. This can still work, of course, if the players themselves are
possessed by a similar sentimentalism. But since my own youth did not involve
any early *D&D* (I started with *Earthdawn*), it doesn't really work for me.
