---
layout: page
title: The Night Witches
date: 2019-09-01
tags: [books]
share: false
---

A role-playing game about the all-female 588th Bomber Regiment of the Red Army,
which saw action on the Eastern Front of WW2.  It's a <abbr title="Powered by
the Apocalypse">PbtA</abbr> game, and closer to the original core of
*Apocalypse World* than, say, *Blades in the Dark*.  (For example, *Night
Witches* actually has Moves, and uses *Apocalypse World* language such as
"hold" and "forward".)

Before playing it, I was a little uncertain how the game would work
out&mdash;would I be able to generate enough engaging but thematically
appropriate hooks?  Would the players be able to stay true to the setting?  How
*exactly* do I use the Agenda, Principles, and Threats to structure the game?
I have read that [Apocalypse World explains how to GM effectively unusually
clearly](https://www.reddit.com/r/rpg/comments/c05gzy/what_are_the_most_beneficial_rpg_books_a_dm_can/er1vjt1);
I can only hope it is more clear than *The Night Witches*!  On the other hand,
I did find very useful advice online on [easing oneself into the
game](https://www.reddit.com/r/rpg/comments/2mkovs/we_are_steve_and_jason_of_bully_pulpit_games_here/cm55xb6)
and [the logistics of running
it](https://www.reddit.com/r/rpg/comments/auzili/night_witches_actually_2_hours_how_many_people_is/ehbqflj).

I played *Night Witches* for the first time in late September 2019, with myself
as GM and five players (J, A, R, G, and D).  We had a large room with big
whiteboards that we put to good use, writing down the names and ranks of all
PCs and NPCs, the composition of the air sections, and the surrounding
locations (Polish town, lake, German HQ, etc).
I used [The Unwomanly Face of War
supplement](https://bullypulpitgames.com/downloads/night-witches-the-unwomanly-face-of-war)
to provide pregenerated characters for all players, to get started quickly.  It
was a blast!

Couple details I remember:

*   The Section lost one of their planes at the end of the night's bombing (in
    a failed landing of a previously damaged aircraft).  But only one of the
    Section members was seriously injured, and they wanted to return to the
    air. Lt Godevskaya (played by G) approached the greenest of the regiment's
    sections, scaring them with stories of what lies beyond the birch forest
    surrounding the base (A had earlier established that some vague dread was
    rumored to roam there).  She succeeded with consequences: she got one of
    the section members to injure herself to avoid flying that night, but the
    plane they got was poor (013, with a "Cursed" personality!) and the
    regimental Politruk became suspcious.  Near the end of the game, these
    suspicions would catch up with Godevskaya, who would be sent to the Gulag
    following an Informal Interview.

*   In the course of the game, Lt Yegorova (played by A) took a Mark to
    "receive a medal you did not deserve": she was exclusively credited for the
    Witches' first, bracing but successful mission.  At the very end of the
    game, Yegorova took another Mark; A made that her final one, and declared
    that Yegorova continued to push herself throughout the war, trying to live
    up to her unearned decoration, until one day she pushed too far.  I thought
    it was a very neat way to close the game.

I enjoyed the way the game tied together and layered ("plaid"?) contributions
from the different players.  For example, R suggested early on that his
character (Jr Lt Malinovskaya) had a friend in the town of Zambr√≥w, an Anrzej
Sienkiewicz.  Later, G suggested that they were romantically involved, by
saying that a rumor has been circulating the airbase that the regimental map
chest had been locked because some lieutenant was writing love letters on
stolen maps...  And finally, on the very first mission, R took a Mark, and
decided that Andrzej had indeed been his lover&mdash;but was now dead, though
they did not yet know it!

On the whole, this was one of my best role-playing experiences.  There were few
rules, but *so much happened* in the two and a half hours we played!  I also
felt like the web of relationships within the airbase thickened satisfyingly as
the game progressed.  My only concern is that some players may have received
less spotlight than they would have liked, since we were a fairly large group.
On the other hand, people seemed to have had enough time to come up with very
interesting contributions when they did speak.

Before playing I was concerned that I would struggle with producing enough
thematically appropriate hooks, but the game basically played itself: the duty
station creation and problems from the first night's bombing run kept the
Section busy throughout the following day.  There always was something
interesting to follow up on.

The specificity of the game's setting is a stregth.  It feels very solid, real,
[and that's
satisfying](http://www.story-games.com/forums/discussion/comment/477484/#Comment_477484)
(and difficult to achieve in a less constrained one-shot game).

